+++
PublishDate = 2022-04-03T22:00:00Z
author = "Ottavio Dantone"
bhp_category = ""
citation = "\"Speaking in Song” with Ottavio Dantone, April 4, 2022, in Between the Strings, produced by Margret Köll,\npodcast, MP3, 43:08, https://www.buzzsprout.com/1934249/10210259-speaking-in-song.\n"
description = ""
downloads = []
externallinks = "Academia Bizantina - https://www.accademiabizantina.it/en/ && Il Giardino Armonico, Viaggio Musicale, playlist - https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=OLAK5uy_ksd_AQhIPVlvjcaVrYSgs5oTdpKkMrbac && L'Orfeo conducted by Claudio Cavina - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jlq5-FynRVc && L'Orfeo conducted by John Eliot Gardiner - https://open.spotify.com/album/4HCExObDtytXFTN4cpotcI &&"
footnotes = ""
hide_from_research = false
image = "/images/dif_000878_190.jpeg"
imgcaptions = ""
map_tag = ["Ferrara", "Cremona", "Ravenna"]
person_tag = ["Ottavio Dantone", "Margret Köll", "Margret Koell", "Claudio Monteverdi", "Pier-Luigi Pizzi", "Luciano Berio", "Emilia Fadini", "Giovanni Antonini", "Claudio Cavina", "John Eliot Gardiner", "Giovanni Gabrieli", "Girolamo Frescobaldi", "Francesco Rognoni"]
project_category = "Podcast: Between the Strings"
relatedresearch = ["Two Souls of a Harp"]
show_in_news = true
status = "draft"
subjects_tag = ["recitar cantando", "Academia Bizantina", "Teatro Comunale di Ferrara", "Orpheus", "L'Orfeo", "Orfeo", "Eurydice", "Euridice", "Messagera", "Messagiera", "mutatio toni", "enharmony", "Seicento", "Programmmusik", "programme music", "program music", "passus duriusculus", "theorbo", "positive organ", "harpsichord", "harp", "tonality", "modality", "opera", "canto", "melisma", "violin", "cornet", "Charon", "harmonic concept", "modal phrase", "prosody", "zither", "cadenza", "Follia", "folia", "Ulisse", "Poppea", "flute", "chitarrone", "Baroque", "trombone", "trumpet", "organ", "basso continuo", "rhetoric", "Il Giardino Armonico", "toccata", "modal", "tonal", "vibrato", "tactus", "scansion", "Possente spirto", "Rinaldo"]
subtype = ["Performance Practice", "Musicology"]
summary_text = "Ottavio Dantone, conductor, outstanding cembalo and organ player and a basso continuo autodidact, demonstrates the power of music and word through some of the key moments in Monteverdi´s masterpiece <i>L'Orfeo</i>. Dantone shares his visionary views on the modernity of Monteverdi´s musical language, advocating for intuition in adapting performances to contemporary needs so as to electrify through synergy of music and words."
timeline_tag = ["1607", "17th century", "18th century"]
title = "Speaking in Song"
type = "Research"

+++
***

<iframe src="https://www.buzzsprout.com/1934249/10210259-speaking-in-song?client_source=small_player&iframe=true" loading="lazy" width="100%" height="200" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title='Between the Strings , Speaking in Song '></iframe>

***

Ottavio Dantone, conductor, outstanding cembalo and organ player and a basso continuo autodidact, demonstrates the power of music and word through some of the key moments in Monteverdi´s masterpiece _L'Orfeo_. Dantone shares his visionary views on the modernity of Monteverdi´s musical language, advocating for intuition in adapting performances to contemporary needs so as to electrify through synergy of music and words.

You can find out more about Ottavio Dantone and his ensemble Accademia Bizantina on [https://www.accademiabizantina.it](https://www.accademiabizantina.it "https://www.accademiabizantina.it").

***

***

***

**Translated transcript of the podcast:**

**Margret Köll:** \[00:00:01\] Welcome to _Between the Strings_, my name is Margret Köll and I am the host of this podcast. It will be in Italian today as I’m very pleased to welcome Ottavio Dantone, a wonderful musician, cembalo and organ player, conductor, founder and head of his group Accademia Bizantina. Welcome Ottavio!

**Ottavio Dantone:** \[00:00:21\] Thank you, my pleasure.

**Köll:** \[00:00:25\] We can tell our audience we are in the Ferrara theatre for the performance of _L’Orfeo_ by Monteverdi, with maestro Pier Luigi Pizzi as the stage director. Ottavio, when and how did you first encounter this opera? Was it a recording or a performance?

**Dantone:** \[00:00:50\] It was an opera production, about 15-16 years ago, in the early 2000s, for the theatres of Emilia Romagna, including Ferrara perhaps, I don’t remember well, but certainly Ravenna. We did Monteverdi’s trilogy, starting with _L’Orfeo_. We started in Cremona, which has an Italian style theatre. I had never tackled an opera by Monteverdi before. I rarely listen to records, so I had no clear idea of the opera’s overall structure, but it was interesting because I began with the score. The first time I conducted _L’Orfeo,_ I used a copy of the original score, the one printed in 1607 with square characters and therefore very difficult to read, but I thought I would be more inspired conducting it for the first time by starting directly from the original. I still have the score I used. So little of it can be read, but I remember it gave me great pleasure to work with. It was nice to get into every detail of this opera, a work of incredible richness with a lot of hints and suggestions from both the musical and the rhetorical points of view. We see countless figures, precisely what I have been studying in musical rhetoric as harpsichordist and organist: recognizing rhetorical figures, interpreting each sign, each form, each phrase. Here we find everything, an unlimited vocabulary of everything that can be said to represent music and speech. Therefore, recitar cantando, this marvellous style in which the music blends with the rhythm of the word, and the word strives, through the forms of the phrases, to represent the affections in a very clear, very precise way. This score gives us a wealth of invaluable information as the first opera in history.

**Köll:** \[00:03:36\] Perhaps we can make this journey by considering some examples of this work you will kindly let us hear on the harpsichord here at the Ferrara theatre, in order to explain a little this concept of recitar cantando, maybe some key points crucial to understanding your vision of this work.

**Dantone:** \[00:04:04\] In order to quickly explain the style of singing related to recitar cantando, we must first consider that in that period one sought, above all, the maximum adherence to the rhythm and the sense of the word. Why recitar cantando? Because yes, we sing, and there are note values but at the same time these must be assimilated into the rhythm of the word. We can take an example involving the harp. Let’s go to the moment—we are already in a dramatic moment—after the wedding of Orpheus and Eurydice, when a messenger arrives and announces that Eurydice was bitten by a snake and is dead. We arrive at the very moment in which the Messaggiera says, “A te ne vengo, messaggiera infelice di caso più infelice più funesto! La tua bella Euridice…” and Orpheus says, “Ohimè che sento, che odo,” and she says, “La tua diletta sposa è morta.” And he says, “Ohimè.” After that, the Messaggiera narrates \[what happened\]. To explain the sense of the rhythm of the recitar cantando the Messaggiera here says, “A te ne vengo Orfeo.” From a purely musical point of view, it’s written like this, \[musical example\] “A te ne vengo, Orfeo, messaggiera infelice di caso più infelice più funesto!” I sang in the rhythm exactly as written. It is clear that a composer cannot write the true rhythm of the word—when we speak, we have a rhythm. \[00:06:07\] “Queste parole che sto dicendo - queste parole che sto dicendo,” have a rhythm that cannot be written down in music, you can only approach it. But we see that the Messaggiera says, \[musical example\] “A te,” instead of saying, \[musical example\] “A te,” she tries to assimilate the sense of rhythmic writing into that of the words, \[musical example\] “A te ne vengo Orfeo, messaggiera infelice di caso più infelice più funesto! La tua bella Euridice… “Ohimè che odo?” Here we see a beautiful example of Monteverdi’s use of enharmony in the sudden change of _mutatio toni_. He changes the tone because he enters Messaggiera’s narration. She says, “La tua bella Euridice,” and \[musical example\] this chord completely changes the tonality and gives a sense of Orpheus’ anguish. He says, \[musical example\] “Ohimè, che odo?” And then he resumes in the same key so that the Messaggiera can continue to relate. This theatrical and dramaturgical concept is extremely modern; an idea of associating the truth as much as possible with the music. The Messaggiera therefore continues with, \[musical example\] “La tua diletta sposa è morta.” “Ohimè.” You see how genuine, through the use of harmony, the use of figures is—because in “Ohimè,” the phrase closes down—we can say that every choice by the composer is a scientific choice from an emotional point of view. The emotional choice is considered thoroughly.

**Köll:** \[00:08:25\] And also at all levels and parameters of music: harmony and rhythm. It indeed seems to me that perhaps the word is not related to Seicento alone, because it often makes me think of the Programmmusik: if he \[Monteverdi\] wants to hide something he goes lower with the voice, he shifts the rhythm.

**Dantone:** \[00:08:48\] The interesting thing is that in this period the sense of music is also created regardless of the word, through the combination of music and words. The sense of music therefore forms because situations, figures, even melodic leaps or harmonic choices are recognised, such as, for example the passus duriusculus, \[musical example\], which means sadness. Today we recognise it as something obvious, but in reality, everything comes from the will to approach the word and music through situations that are recognized emotionally and thus create a semiology that makes sense in what happens. It is created over time by composers and musicians who try to get as close as possible to the feelings of music, with or without words.

**Köll:** \[00:09:56\] This is fabulous. Another thing that amazes me as a continuo player is when he \[Monteverdi\] writes a chord and puts a ninth or a seventh for the voice. We have these arguments among continuo players on how to accompany this.

**Dantone:** \[00:10:15\] We have treatises, testimonies. A continuo player, today as in the past, must first of all be prepared on the sources, because the knowledge of sources is important. But there are many cases in which it is necessary to take decisions that come from aesthetic knowledge, not only of the treatises but of the repertoire itself. I mean to say that a continuo player can sometimes make choices inspired by an instrumental repertoire. We have wonderful examples in many toccatas by Gabrieli, Frescobaldi, and so on, where we can clearly see movements, passages that, even in the absence of words, help us understand how certain situations could be resolved and clearly applied. Another important point is that Monteverdi performed this work for the first time in an intimate environment. The choice of how to do the continuo, the choice of instruments, is also related to the space. We thus have to consider that it is not anti-philological to make decisions in relation to the space, to the situation, because even in the 17th century there were outdoor or indoor venues, bigger and smaller; this is very important in a theatre like this. Certainly, our choices of the instrumental set also serve to fill a certain space, even if we have some indications from Monteverdi that are very useful, for example, when she comes—we are always talking about the Messaggiera—to give such tragic news, Monteverdi does not use a dramatic instrumental mass, but only a theorbo and a positive organ. This bareness of accompaniment is almost more impressive than using many instruments. It is thus very important to use Monteverdi’s directions, because that’s what he has in mind emotionally. However, it must also be said that in the whole of the Messaggiera passage he writes “organo di legno e chitarrone,” but doesn’t write anything else. So, it is a possible choice when the Messaggiera begins to tell Orpheus the story, but it is not wrong to change instrumentation. In fact, I add the harpsichord because its arpeggio gives a suggestion of storytelling. So, Monteverdi’s indication may not be absolute, but it may be an indication of that moment and you still have to be able to make decisions. It is equally important that the choice of the performer, the choice of the continuo player comes from a full aesthetic awareness. The use of harmonies: for example, in this period, the difference between modality and tonality was still very important. Put more simply, over the centuries, tonalities were decided on, especially with regard to the sixth and seventh intervals—I’ll give an example, I’ll play a D minor scale, \[musical example\], this for us is a D minor scale. Thinking of it in modal terms, that is, deriving from the ancient Gregorian modes, both from a melodic point of view, \[musical example\] … the leading-tone, that is, this, \[musical example\], is absent, but if, from the harmonic point of view in modern terms, we perform a rise of the bass from the tonic \[we get\], \[musical example\]. If we think in more ancient terms and conception, \[musical example\], even in the bass movement, using harmonies in a modal sense gives a clear stylistic imprint. Therefore, if we are unsure, when accompanying in _L’Orfeo,_ about the second interval, \[musical example\], rather than this chord, it is more appropriate to play this, \[musical example\]. The continuo player’s style is also influenced by the conception of tonality and modality. In that period the two things were often ambiguous: in some cases, the modern sense of tonality is used, but we are more often in modal terms. When we play an opera, somebody is responsible for the continuo: I am in this case, as I’m also a harpsichordist. It is very nice that, with many continuo players, we have some discussion. This makes sense as today we have so much information, but at a certain point we must also have the courage to make a decision and normally the one leading makes it. In some cases, there are different solutions that may be just as appropriate. And that’s the beauty of it.

**Köll:** \[00:16:15\] About singers… I would also be curious to know—because it is a very particular style for singers, perhaps more recited than sung—how would a young singer approach this repertoire?

**Dantone:** \[00:16:31\] You were with us on this particular project that was born in Spoleto. A cast was chosen to make something different, a version by Luciano Berio who wanted to not only use modern instruments, but also voices that are not lyrically trained. When, for various reasons, it was instead decided to stage _L’Orfeo_ in its original form, it was entrusted to me. I was told, “Now we have to change all the singers because almost none is a professional singer.” They were young people with untrained voices, some with background in the musical, so, modern repertoire. I said, “Let’s listen to these guys.” I listened to them and noticed that to make this music it is almost easier to start from zero, that is, from a purity of vocal conception. Clearly, in an opera like this, even at the time, a professional singer was called to sing the role of Orpheus, but with a vocal approach that is very far from that of a contemporary opera singer. The professional singer encounters greater difficulty because he has to unlearn many vocal habits, such as to, for example, use the vibrato only in certain situations, when the emotional-expressive context requires it; the singer has to also forget rhythm in the scholastic and operatic sense, because here rhythm, as we have seen in the brief example I gave, must have its own—in fact, it is called tactus—scansion within which there is this rhythm suggested by the composer through rhythmic notations that must also be close to the word. What seems to be a simple operation is extremely difficult for a singer who reads music as usual. Paradoxically, it is easier to mould a singer who comes from pop music or has no experience. I was right, because notwithstanding the vocal limits, as we understand them today, of some of these young singers, they obtained results perhaps closer to what could have been a conception of this mysterious recitar cantando still much debated today, both from the point of view of the rhythm of the singing and from the point of view of how it should be accompanied, because all must be at the service of the word, the word has a freedom, the continuo must maintain this rhythmic aspect, sometimes it must be dissociated rhythmically from the word just to make it clear that the word has its own independent line. In other situations, the continuo has to support the word, so this is extremely complex. When you play a 17th-century opera, it is a much more capillary work, much more detailed than an 18th-century opera where, at least from a rhythmic point of view, everything is much simpler and more regular; of course, there are always the stylistic, performance and aesthetic aspects. But here we are in a world far from what is normally taught at school. I don’t think they teach recitar cantando in the singing classes at conservatories.

**Köll**: Perhaps in the future!

**Dantone**: We hope for this in the future because it is a style related to a very peculiar period and to a very specific specialisation.

**Köll:** \[00:21:05\] There is a terrific example related to the harp in Act III. Perhaps you could say something about “Possente spirto,” where, it would appear, Monteverdi wrote every detail of the emotion for the singer and for the use of the harp.

**Dantone:** \[00:21:26\] There is this central, topical moment in the opera, when Orpheus tries to move or rather persuade Charon to let him pass. How does he do it? Through beauty and variety, and incredible melismas of his singing. It is very interesting: in the original score we have two lines of singing: one is, in a certain sense, the skeleton, the basic notes on which Monteverdi writes some examples. Today we perform it verbatim, but it could be considered an example of diminution. The first phrase is very clear as it is written with long notes, \[musical example\] “Possente spirto,” and Monteverdi writes, \[musical example\] “Possente spirto.” This is nothing. Going to the second phrase, \[musical example\] “E formidabil nume.” They are very long notes, but Monteverdi writes, \[musical example\] “E formidabil nume.” Almost like Arabic melismas. This makes us understand the richness of the diminutions in singing—we have beautiful treatises, even instrumental ones such as the famous \[Francesco\] Rognoni on the violin and the voice, where on only two simple intervals he shows how much variety there can be in variations. But what’s the point? These variations are always very modal. In this particular canto we observe the whole harmonic concept of that time. The interesting thing is that this persuasion \[of Charon\], all these variations are always interspersed with interventions by different groups of instruments: there is also an emotional interaction between the voice and the instruments. The voice blends with the instruments and inspires the instruments, which respond to the voice as an emotional-expressive echo. After the first phrase, \[musical example\] “Possente spirto,” the violins begin, \[musical example\], a modal phrase, \[musical example\]. And then, the second phrase, \[musical example\] “E formidabil nume.” The violin responds, \[musical example\]. And it develops like this with these responses. \[00:25:04\] At the end of the first phrase, the two responding violins play their own phrase, and this pattern is repeated after the second passage of Orpheus with responding cornets as the typical instruments of this period; the cornet was considered to most closely resemble the voice, ideally imitating the voice. Actually, any instrument, even the harp, the harpsichord, even the instruments furthest away from the voice, were to strive for the ideal of resembling the voice as much as possible, at least from a prosodic point of view, that of speaking. When playing a rhythm with the harp or harpsichord, instead of playing, \[musical example\], there was an attempt to “speak” it, \[musical example\], looking for a rhythm that would resemble speaking, so the shortest note followed by a shorter one; a short one followed by a longer one; an alternation of long and short notes that mimic the sense of the word. This is also a way of conceiving the way of playing, even in the continuo, when you try to make a passage resemble a speaking voice.

**Köll:** \[00:26:16\] In a sense, a reminder also of the Greek tradition of the articulation of the word.

**Dantone:** \[00:26:26\] Absolutely, well said. Here we have the cornets also responding with their own phrase. At last, there arrives perhaps the instrument-symbol—Orpheus is accompanied by the zither—the harp, perhaps the instrument that idealizes the singer with his plucked instrument. The harp responds with phrases and concludes with a beautiful, long and varied cadenza. In this cadenza we can clearly see, concluding the whole first section of the canto, this lament, persuasion \[of Charon\], the instrument that is most hypnotic, remaining in contemplation, in absolute emotional abstraction. And then finally we understand—we could talk for hours about this canto of Orpheus—a canto with an extremely complex construction, very precise rhythmic base, and precise harmonic structure that can only be guessed at in the first part because it is very dilated, but then in the fourth and last phrase it becomes clear that it was a basso ostinato, \[musical example\], which almost resembles a proto Follia. So, a harmonic, rhythmic structure, almost a dance, is discovered in the last passage of Orpheus. It’s a structure of a truly ingenious conception. It achieves its goal because Charon, having been tamed, falls asleep. This is quite a broad representation of what the persuasive power of music can be.

**Köll:** \[00:28:56\] For _L’Orfeo_, in particular, Monteverdi wrote the distribution, whilst he gave us no indication in the _Ulisse_ and _Poppea_.

**Dantone:** \[00:29:07\] _L’Orfeo_ had the fortune to be printed, in the way this was done at the time, as a testimony of something important, an event that had the privilege of being put into print and in the score, they tell us what happened at the time. The indicated distribution is what they used on that occasion. It’s very interesting because we have a variety of instruments, and this is the only case in the entire Baroque and post-Baroque period. In the 18th century, strings are indicated but very often instruments were added, there wasn’t this precision in the choice of the ensemble. Here the indication is very precise: two flutes, harp, two chitarroni, organ, harpsichord, cornets, trombones and trumpets, and so on. Clearly, we can follow Monteverdi’s indications, but this does not mean we must necessarily use them to the letter. The indications are interesting not so much in the list of instruments, but rather in the score where he indicates exactly what he wants at certain moments: sometimes only the harpsichord, sometimes the chitarrone, the organ, and so on. These indications are very valuable because they give an idea of the emotional situation related to the timbre. We know that the cornets and trombones, usually placed in the opposite position to the strings, had a meaning: for example, the trombones express the more infernal contexts. \[00:31:06\] In our production, the harp is placed with the hell \[instruments\], but only for the reasons to do with stage direction. In the directorial idea of this _L’Orfeo_ the harp as a symbolic instrument belongs to neither faction. However, at that time this differentiation was very much felt depending on the situation and on the use of certain instruments, and therefore this must be known and followed, with all the possible exceptions that may serve to express the sense of what is happening. When you stage a performance it is always very important to accompany what happens in an emotional way, to be able to mediate between pure philology—what we have at our disposal—and contemporary needs, because today we also use spaces that sometimes lead us to use certain types of instruments or at least a certain number of instruments differently to how it might have been at the time. From the philological point of view the concept of the language of music matters more than the use of instruments. We use historical instruments because they are clearly the most suitable for expressing this music. But philology always starts with language: from an aesthetic conception of the language to which the instruments were all subjected.

**Köll:** \[00:32:49\] It is good to be close to the singer in this production in order to be closer to the language because we are often in the pit, which should have no place in this repertoire. Here we are lucky to be right next to the voice.

**Dantone:** \[00:33:09\] The stage director Pier Luigi Pizzi explained that he wanted the instruments to be part of the performance visually, but also from the point of view of the sound production and visual interaction with the singers. In effect, the source of the sound also becomes emotional. In the 17th century it was certainly customary for the instruments to be on the same level as the singers; in the 18th century the pits still weren’t as low as they are today. We are privileged in playing this opera in an optimal situation because we have the singers running around. We are making music the way it used to be made: by listening to each other. You really have to listen, because sometimes the singers can be a bit far, and sometimes they are behind me, for example. It is nice to make music in this way, very formative and stimulating.

**Köll:** \[00:34:19\] Yesterday, when we did the dress rehearsal when Orpheus approached the instrument… it is moving, when he touches the harp, I feel…

**Dantone:** \[00:34:31\] Almost in adoration…

**Köll:** \[00:34:32\] I feel more connected instead of just accompanying him in my imagination, as when in the pit.

**Dantone:** \[00:34:39\] It’s a moment I always look out for, because it moves me. Especially when he plays the harp and he’s just in full ecstasy, listening to the sound of the harp. It’s beautiful because from a scenic point of view it’s definitely close to the Baroque concept. I have worked with Pier Luigi Pizzi often—he has an instinctive feel for the Baroque aesthetic. I remember a “Rinaldo” I conducted many years ago when he used veils and other tricks suggesting a sort of a visual wonder, and this is very, very Baroque. His choice in this case works well, even without period costumes, and this teaches us that it is not so much the instruments, the costumes or the set, which is, in this case, also beautiful and Baroque, but the rhetorical interaction between the instruments, the voices and the language, the prosody and the rhythm we give to the words that makes us recognise a period, so beyond the set design, costumes and other scenic things.

**Köll:** \[00:35:59\] And I would be very curious Ottavio, to know, because I really don’t know, when you were learning the continuo, where did you learn it, who was crucial for you in learning basso continuo?

**Dantone:** \[00:36:17\] I didn’t study basso continuo with anyone. My harpsichord teacher Emilia Fadini, who passed away recently, taught in Italy when everyone went to study abroad. I stayed in Italy because I knew this teacher specialized in musical rhetoric, she had done very important studies. I thought it was interesting to study with her even if she was not an expert continuo player. Why did I become a continuo player? Because my training was very particular: in my family there were no musicians. When I was four or five years old, I was given a toy with two octaves and already formed chords, there was C major and so on, and that could also be mixed. I learned how to read music and write it by myself, so that by the time I was nine, ten years old I had learnt how to compose, all in an empirical way. \[Musical example) I would play a chord, then I would hear the chords formed on the keyboard, there was C major \[musical example\], but if I mix C major with A minor this is what comes out, \[musical example\] and then this becomes a seventh. So, I learned harmony by myself.

**Köll:** Experimenting.

**Dantone:** \[00:37:38\] Yes, and this type of training, which is a bit empirical, certainly favours improvisation and knowledge of harmony. For example, I find it very easy to play a piece in one key and do it in another completely different key, but I’m not transposing. It’s natural for me to move in pitch because I’m used to recognising chords not only from a musical point of view but also from a physical one. I see their shapes on the keyboard. This is something you can’t teach in school because there you have to give very precise directions. Improvisation is seldom taught, and basso continuo is only taught alongside repertoire. Or you attend specific classes, I’ve given some as a teacher myself. It is necessary to search, as it was said, quaerendo invenietis: who seeks, finds. This is the secret of the continuo player and the improviser. The one who seeks, finds: you must experiment, must not be afraid or ashamed of making mistakes. One who knows how to play continuo also knows that he has achieved a deep self-insight. Treatises cannot say everything, we need to attain the knowledge of harmony as a real language, it has its form, its contents and its emotional meaning.

**Köll:** \[00:39:09\] I have always found it essential to compare with other instruments.

**Dantone:** \[00:39:15\] This is beautiful: we have the organ, the harpsichord, the theorbo and the harp and each one has different characteristics.

**Köll:** \[00:39:22\] Also idiomatically.

**Dantone:** \[00:39:23\] Yes, and mixing them and even sometimes taking inspiration from certain instruments enriches one’s repertoire because continuo is also variety. We can express a chord in so many different ways and the same notes, it depends on how they are played, whether as plaque or in arpeggio, fast, slow, with the passaggio notes, and each of these solutions can mean something different, this is fascinating.

**Köll:** \[00:39:57\] At the end of our journey this morning, I’d like to ask you what recording you would recommend for someone who wants to fall in love with 17th-century Italian music.

**Dantone:** \[00:40:10\] There is a record by Il Giardino Armonico, on which I was not the conductor, but in which I participated. We recorded music from the Italian Seicento and I remember it as a beautiful experience with my friend Giovanni Antonini. I don’t remember the title of the record \[_Viaggio Musicale_\], but it’s a record of 17th century music, made 15 years ago. It is a beautiful record because it has a variety, so many different forms; it makes you understand the richness and modernity of this music. We say modernity to mean that this record lets us see how close the music of that era is to us. You could listen to Monteverdi’s _L’Orfeo_ of which we have talked so much. There are so many interesting recordings, both Italian and foreign. I could recommend that of Claudio Cavina, who was a very good musician, and who unfortunately passed away recently, but also that of \[John Eliot\] Gardiner and other foreign performers. Listening to several recordings, you will always hear different things because we have to make choices. What is fascinating in the 17th century is that it speaks to us. The important thing about the Seicento music, is that it speaks to us perhaps more so than music of any other period because the fixed idea of those musicians was to speak, to get to the heart and to the emotion through music and word.

**Köll:** \[00:42:07\] A thousand thanks, between music and word, between the strings, this is beautiful. Thank you to those who were with me for this podcast.

**Dantone**: It was a pleasure.

**Köll:** Until next time.

**Dantone:** \[00:42:17\] Until next time.