+++
PublishDate = 2021-10-31T23:00:00Z
author = ""
barberiniharpproject = ""
bhp-category = "Convening"
citation = ""
description = "Historical harpist and researcher Chiara Granata and renowned luthier Dario Pontiggia opened the Convening around the Barberini Harp, a Harfenlabor symposium (December 14-16, 2016 at the Museo Nazionale degli Strumenti Musicali and the Istituto Storico Austriaco in Roma). Their presentation covered the already established facts about the harp, such as the time period in which it could have been constructed, based on technical data (wood examinations), and corrected against historical and iconographical analyses of the Barberini family’s position and cultural policy under Urbano VIII. Crucially, Granata and Pontiggia presented their discoveries, findings and analysis related to new facts about the Barberini Harp that had recently come to light, which they also published in 2015, in the Recercare journal. By integrating research from their respective fields, Granata and Pontiggia arrive at a series of answers as well as open questions. The Barberini Harp represents a great innovation in harp building, as demonstrated through a comparison with the Estense and earlier harps, and yet Pontiggia’s analysis of the Barberini Harp’s technical data suggests that aspects of it are not musically functional. The harp’s avant-garde status suggests it could have been one of a series—new documents reveal it was built in Geronimo Acciari’s workshop in 1632, but no conclusive evidence has been found of other similar harps. Granata and Pontiggia also compare the Barberini Harp with the one depicted by Lanfranco, and propose that they are not the same instrument. One of the inconsistencies concerns the Golden Fleece, present on the harp, yet missing in the painting, and prompts both technical and historical analysis: the former tells us the fleece was probably added later; the latter point to when the order might have been bestowed on the Barberini family. This sumptuous musical instrument was also a symbol of power, and as Granata tells us, the only “window” we have onto a story “much broader than we can imagine.”"
downloads = []
externallinks = "Granata, Chiara. “‘Un’arpa Grande Tutta Intagliata e Dorata’. New Documents on the Barberini Harp.” Recercare 27, no. 1/2 (2015): 139–64. - www.jstor.org/stable/26381197 && Pontiggia, Dario. “Barberini Harp. Data Sheets.” Recercare 27, no. 1/2 (2015): 165–84. - http://www.jstor.org/stable/26381198 && \nMuseo Nazionale degli Strumenti Musicali - http://museostrumentimusicali.beniculturali.it/index.php?it/129/arpa-barberini && Istituto Storico Austriaco - http://www.oehirom.it/it/ && Hammond, Frederick. “Some Notes on Giovanni Battista Boni Da Cortona, Girolamo Zenti, and Others.” - https://doi.org/10.2307/841168 && Bruni, S., Gessi, A., Lazzaroni, F. et al., “Diagnostic investigations on the Barberini harp,” - https://doi.org/10.1007/s12210-020-00894-x && "
footnotes = ""
image = "/images/chiara-dario-video-hold.png"
imgcaptions = ""
map_tag = ["Roma"]
person_tag = ["Chiara Granata", "Dario Pontiggia", "Luisa Cervelli", "Emanuel Winternitz", "Elio Corona", "Taddeo Barberini", "Giovanni Tubi", "Girolamo Acciari", "Marinucci", "Marco Marazzoli", "Simone Lagi", "Bernhard Schrammek", "Frederick Hammond", "Francesco Barberini", "Carlo Moretti", "Giovanni Lanfranco", "Carlo Rainaldi", "Francesco Acciari", "Giovan-Battista Borghese", "Antonio-Maria Ciacci", "Cardinal-Maffeo-Barberini", "Cardinal-Antonio-Barberini", "Urbano-VIII", "Dinko Fabris", "Girolamo Frescobaldi", "Gian-Lorenzo-Bernini"]
project_category = "Barberini Harp Project"
relatedresearch = ["Designs for Musical Instruments", "“Venere che sona d’arpa e due amori”: Marco Marazzoli at the Barberini Court", "Eric Kleinmann:&&Practical Examination of the Barberini Harp", "Scientific Commentary: Sol di corde soavi armo le dita? Only music I carry as my weapon? Different ways to use the same instrument", "Thünen-Institut Wood Species Identification Report"]
show_in_news = false
status = "to be approved by author"
subjects_tag = ["Barberini Harp", "Convening around the Barberini Harp", "Museo Nazionale degli Strumenti Musicali", "Istituto Storico Austriaco", "Barberini Archive", "harp", "new documents", "data sheets", "richly decorated", "gilded", "harpist", "repertoire", "master", "soundbox", "three rows of strings", "3-course harp", "soundboard", "wood", "timbre", "bass", "strings", "instrument design", "growth rings", "Prince of Palestrina", "timber", "examination", "coat of arms", "Golden Fleece", "dating", "carver", "wood-carver", "payment", "Barberini court", "construction", "inventory", "scudi", "harpsichord", "corde", "stringing", "bastone", "walnut", "bas-relief", "carving", "floral decoration", "laurel leaves", "sculptural decoration", "artisans", "gilding", "gilder", "painter", "lutenist", "Acciari workshop", "Venere che suona l'arpa", "Allegoria della Musica", "Venus Playing the Harp", "The Allegory of Music", "primary instrument", "builder", "cantata", "arpa doppia", "stringed instruments", "patronage", "dendrochronological", "terminus post quem", "cultural policy", "frequency", "changes", "parade", "frequencies", "triple harp"]
subtype = ["Organology", "Performance Practice", "Iconography", "Sociology of Art"]
summary_text = "Harfenlabor invited harpist and researcher Chiara Granata and luthier Dario Pontiggia to present their findings and analysis related to new facts about the Barberini Harp. Archival documents reveal that the harp was commissioned by Antonio Barberini and built in Geronimo Acciari’s workshop in 1632. Granata and Pontiggia depart from the other analyses presented by Harfenlabor by doubting that Giovanni Lanfranco's painting <i>Venus Playing the Harp</i> depicts the Barberini Harp. By integrating technical and historical research Granata and Pontiggia offer facts as well as open questions about this sumptuous musical instrument as the only “window” we have onto a story “much broader than we can imagine.”"
timeline_tag = ["2016", "2015", "1623", "1537", "1605", "1610", "1630", "1662", "1636", "1639", "1582-1647", "1600s", "1632-1633"]
title = "Barberini Harp Project / Convening&&What We Know, and What We still Do Not Understand about the Barberini Harp"
type = "Research"

+++
***

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9"><iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/644006949?h=167362affa&badge=0&autopause=0&player_id=0&app_id=58479" width="640" height="360" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;" title="Harfenlabor. Chiara Granata, Dario Pontiggia: What We Know, and What We still Do Not Understand about the Barberini Harp"></iframe> </div><div class="chapters"></div>

***

Harfenlabor invited the historical harpist and researcher <span id="person_tag">Chiara Granata</span> and renowned luthier <span id="person_tag">Dario Pontiggia</span> to share and present their discoveries, findings and analysis related to new facts about the <span id="subjects_tag">Barberini Harp</span> that had recently come to light. Granata and Pontiggia collaborated on the analysis of these new documents on the Barberini Harp through the perspective of organology, and published the outcomes of this research in 2015, in the _Recercare_ journal. Their presentation opened <span id="subjects_tag">Convening around the Barberini Harp</span>, a symposium organised by Harfenlabor that took place on December 14-16, 2016 at the Museo Nazionale degli Strumenti Musicali and at the Istituto Storico Austriaco in <span id="map_tag">Roma</span>.

[Granata, Chiara. “‘Un’arpa Grande Tutta Intagliata e Dorata’. New Documents on the Barberini Harp.” _Recercare_ 27, no. 1/2 (2015): 139–64.](http://www.jstor.org/stable/26381197 "Granata, Chiara. “‘Un’arpa Grande Tutta Intagliata e Dorata’. New Documents on the Barberini Harp.” Recercare 27, no. 1/2 (2015): 139–64.")

[Pontiggia, Dario. “Barberini Harp. Data Sheets.” _Recercare_ 27, no. 1/2 (2015): 165–84.](http://www.jstor.org/stable/26381198 "Pontiggia, Dario. “Barberini Harp. Data Sheets.” Recercare 27, no. 1/2 (2015): 165–84. ")

© Armin Linke / Harfenlabor 2020  
Licensed under [CC BY-NC-ND International 4.0](https://harfenlabor.netlify.app/aboutpage/#ccbyncnd)