+++
PublishDate = 2021-11-02T23:00:00Z
author = "Elisabetta Frullini"
description = ""
downloads = []
externallinks = ""
footnotes = "1. On Lanfranco’s painting, see recent contribution by Marina Haiduk, catalogue entry in Wege des Barock. Die Nationalgalerien Barberini Corsini in Rom, exib. cat. Potsdam 2019 (München, London, New York: Prestel 2019), 92, cat. nr. 6; For a more exhaustive bibliografy please refer to Lorenza Mochi Onori, catalogue entry in Lorenza Mochi Onori, Rossella Vodret Adamo, Galleria Nazionale d’Arte Antica – Palazzo Barberini – I dipinti. Catalogo sistematico, (Rome: L’Erma di Bretschneider 2008), 236.&&\n2. On the Barberini Harp, see Chiara Granata, “‘Un’arpa grande tutta intagliata e dorata’. New documents on the Barberini harp”, Recercare 27, (2015), 139–164. Eleonora Simi Bonini, “Uno strumento e la sua storia: l’arpa Barberini”, Nuova rivista musicale italiana XLVI, (2012), 205–226.&&\n3. Franca Trinchieri Camiz, “Una Venere, un’Erminia, una Cleopatra di Giovanni Lanfranco in un documento inedito”, Bollettino d’arte 67 (1991), 165–168.&&\n4. Sabba Castiglione, Ricordi, overo Ammaestramenti (Venice 1575), 112.&&\n5. Giovanni Battista Doni, Lyra Barberina amphicordos. De’ trattati di musica (Florence 1763), II, 108–109.&&\n6. Vedi alla nota 3.&&\n7. Lorenza Mochi Onori, Rossela Vodret Adamo, La Galleria Nazionale d’Arte Antica, Regesto delle didascalie (Rome: Palombi, 1989), 99.\n8. \"Venus playing the harp with two cupids,\" Roma, Archivio di Stato (hereafter ASR), Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, f. 50r.&&\n9. Getty Provenance Index (Database).&&\n10. Alexandra Ziane, “Santa o cortigiana? La figura della donna musicista dopo i suonatori di liuto di Caravaggio”, in La musica al tempo di Caravaggio, eds. Stefania Macioce/Enrico de Pascale (Rome: Gangemi, 2012), 149–164.&&\n11. Differisce da questa solo per pochi dettagli: 1) la doratura copre tutta la colonna, 2) le rosette sono disposte in modo differente, 3) non coincide il numero dei bottoni, delle corde e delle finiture orizzontali sul corpo dell’arpa. Queste differenze tra l’arpa dipinta e quella conservata al Museo Nazionale degli Strumenti Musicali, hanno generato pareri discordanti sul fatto che lo strumento coincida o meno con quello rappresentato. Sull’argomento cfr. Chiara Granata, “‘Un’arpa grande tutta intagliata e dorata’, cit., 152–153. A nostro avviso queste differenze sono da attribuire ad una semplificazione pittorica da parte del Lanfranco, il quale non sembra interessato ad una resa perfetta dell’oggetto (cosa forse neanche necessaria, considerando l’importanza dello strumento qui rappresentato). Il ritrovamento di documenti nell’archivio Barberini inerenti la committenza di un’arpa per il Marazzoli e messi in relazione con la costruzione dell’arpa Barberini, dovrebbe avvalorare quest’ipotesi. Vedi infra.&&\n12. Getty Provenance Index (Database).&&\n13. Chiara Granata, “‘Un’arpa grande tutta intagliata e dorata’”, cit., in particolare 147–150 e 163–165 (Appendice).&&\n14. Su Marco Marazzoli cfr. Arnaldo Morelli, “Marco Marazzoli (ad vocem)”, in Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani, ed. Alberto M. Ghisalberti (Rome, 2007), vol. 69, 466–471 e Davide Daolmi,\"L’armi e gli amori\". Un’opera di cappa e spada nella Roma di mezzo Seicento, (PhD diss., Università degli studi di Roma \"La Sapienza\", 2001), http://www.examenapium.it/armi.&&\n15. Jean Lionnet, “Andrè Maugars: risposta data a un curioso sul sentimento della musica in Italia”, in Nuova rivista musicale italiana 19, no. 4 (1985), 691, nota 12.&&\n16. Bussolanti sono prestigiosi rappresentanti pontifici; il titolo di bussolante all’interno della famiglia pontificia designava gli addetti all’anticamera del papa.&&\n17. Delle opere del Marazzoli per i Barberini la prima che conosciamo è l’Egisto o Chi soffre speri scritta in collaborazione con Virgilio Mazzocchi, di cui a Marazzoli viene attribuito l’intermedio La Fiera di Farfa, rappresentato con grande successo grazie anche alle scenografie di Gianlorenzo Bernini nel 1639 al teatro alle Quattro Fontane. Altre opere sono Il Giudizio della Ragione (1643); Dal Male il Bene (1653); L’armi e gli Amori(1654, ma andata in scena nel ’55) e La Vita Umana (1656), dramma allegorico dalle scenografie sfarzose composto in onore dell’arrivo di Cristina di Svezia a Roma.&&\n18. ASR, Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, f. 36r–v.&&\n19. “Item lascio che Anna [sua erede] gli consegni [ovvero al card Antonio] due Arpe una indorata con la sua cassa e l’Altra di Legno ordinario essendo dell’Emza Sua.”ASR, Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, f. 50v.&&\n20. ASR, Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, ff. 36v–38r.&&\n21. [Erminia among the shepherds]&&\n22. ASR, Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, ff. 38r–39v.&&\n23. Dell’attività di pittore del Marazzoli ci informa anche Girolamo Tezi, quando racconta di un ritratto che il Marazzoli dipinse di Silvio Antonini, scalco del cardinale Antonio Barberini: „rogatus Marazzolius, ut nostrum desiderium leniret, ad vivum Antonini expressit effigiem, eamque Principi nostro detulit; et quidem, dum Antoninus abfuit, gratissima fuit, post vero reditum, dum eius praesentia frui et oblectare nos licet, non curiose perquiritur amplius.“ Girolamo Tezi, Aedes Barberinae ad Quirinalem descriptae, ed. Lucia Faedo (Pisa: Ed. della Normale, 2005), 430. Marazzoli non era l’unico pittore dilettante tra i musicisti di corte: ricordiamo a questo proposito il caso dei cantori pontifici Bonaventura Argenti, allievo di Matteo Rosselli, e Domenico Palombi, allievo di Pietro da Cortona. Per il primo vedi Silvia Bruno, “Musici e pittori tra Firenze e Roma nel secondo quarto del Seicento“, Studi Secenteschi 49 (2008), 204, nota 110. Per il secondo vedi Luca Calenne, Maria Cristina Paciello, „Pittor de’ gli orecchi è Rodomonte. Ricerche su Domenico Palombi, Musico e Pittore del ‘600“ in Annali della Pontificia Insigne Accademia di Belle Arti e Lettere dei Virtuosi al Pantheon 12 (2012), 241–264, 449–463.&&\n24. Sull’importanza presso le corti romane del Seicento di sapersi dilettare in diverse discipline cfr. Arnaldo Morelli, “Carlo Rainaldi musicista gentiluomo. Una riconsiderazione e qualche novità”, in La festa delle arti. Scritti in onore di Marcello Fagiolo per cinquant’anni di studi, eds. Vincenzo Cazzato, Sebastiano Roberto, Mario Bevilacqua (Rome: Gangemi, 2001), 432–435.&&\n25. (Lives of painters). Jakob Hess ed., Die Künstlerbiographien des Giovanni Battista Passeri. Nach den Handschriften des Autors, (Leipzig: Keller, 1934), 158.&&\n26. ASR, Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, f. 38v.&&\n27. This is an important detail, because some of the data in the inventory is incomplete - descriptions do not always clearly identify the subjects; measurements are sometimes missing – all the frames, on the other hand, are always described. For example, even if we did not know the painting Venus Playing the Harp, the \"carved, black, and gilded frame\" would reveal much of its value, especially as it is the only painting in the apartment with a carved frame.&&\n28. Who is to say that this is not a reference to an oratory, based on St. Catherine, composed by Marazzoli in the last years of his life, whose score is now preserved in the Vatican Apostolic Library (Barb.lat. 4209). The collection in which the score is contained belonged to the singer Marc’Antonio Pasqualini, whose career was encouraged by Cardinal Antonio Barberini more than any other. It was in the context of the Barberini court then that the musical scores contained in this collection – partly composed, partly transcribed by Pasqualini – were created, with the Marazzoli oratorio the longest composition among them. For Marazzoli’s oratory, we refer you to Reliquie di Roma II: Caro sposo, ATALANTE (ensemble), Erin Headley (director), Destino Classics/Nimbus Alliance NI 6185, 2012. CD. For a musicological analysis, please see Christian Speck, Das italienische Oratorium, 1625–1665: Musik und Dichtung, (Turnhout: Brepols 2003), 392–417.&&\n29. Venus playing the harp&&\n30. ASR, Notai della R.C.A., vol. 2082, f. 50r.&&\n31. See note 5."
image = ""
imgcaptions = "Fig. 1 &&\nFig. 2 &&\nFig. 3 [Venus and the Organ Player]&&\nFig. 4 &&"
map_tag = ["Roma", "Parma", "Napoli"]
person_tag = ["Elisabetta Frullini", "Giovanni Lanfranco", "Antonio Barberini", "Marco Marazzoli", "Sabba Castiglione", "Giovanni Battista Doni", "Franca Trinchieri Camiz", "Ippolito Aldobrandini", "Urbano VIII Barberini", "Pope Innocent X", "Carlo Barberini", "Maffeo Barberini", "Baldassare Castiglione", "Giovanni Battista Passeri", "Giulio Rospigliosi", "Carlo Pio di Savoia", "Orazio Magalotti", "Pope Clement IX", "Costanza Magalotti", "Titian"]
project_category = "Barberini Harp Project"
relatedresearch = []
show_in_news = false
status = "to be approved by author"
subjects_tag = ["Venere che suona l’arpa", "Venus playing the harp", "Barberini Harp", "Venere e il suonatore di Organo", "Venus", "Giostra del Saracino", "Pontifical chapel", "Cortegiano", "Vite de’ pittori", "Museo degli Strumenti Musicali", "Barberini Archive", "Barberini court", "Vite de’ pittori", "“Venere che sona d’arpa e due amori”"]
subtype = ["Performance Practice", "Musicology", "Iconography", "Sociology of Art"]
summary_text = ""
timeline_tag = ["1575", "1671", "1500s", "1730s", "1636-44", "1633", "1634", "1626", "1629", "1637", "1639", "1640", "1630s", "1644", "1653", "1662", "1632-33"]
title = "“Venere che sona d’arpa e due amori”: Marco Marazzoli at the Barberini Court"
type = "Research"

+++
This article focuses on a painting by <span id="subjects_tag">Giovanni Lanfranco</span> that is today on display at the Galleria Nazionale d’Arte Antica di Palazzo Barberini (Fig. 1),<sup>1</sup> depicting a harp very similar to the one usually referred to as the <span id="subjects_tag">Barberini Harp</span>,<sup>2</sup> today at the <span id="subjects_tag">Museo degli Strumenti Musicali</span> in <span id="map_tag">Roma</span> (Fig. 2). It had long been thought that the Barberini family commissioned the painter Giovanni Lanfranco to produce the painting, until it was discovered that it had, in fact, been bequeathed to <span id="person_tag">Antonio Barberini</span> by the famous harpist, composer and singer <span id="person_tag">Marco Marazzoli</span>.<sup>3</sup> This article intends to, first of all, provide insights into the painting with particular regard to the representation of the harp, and to offer a more precise consideration as to when this painting was created. Later, we intend to analyse the painting inside Marazzoli's home by relating it to other paintings exhibited there.

**1)** The painting and Marazzoli

The humanist <span id="person_tag">Sabba Castiglione</span> writes in his _Memoirs_, published in <span id="timeline_tag">1575</span> about musical instruments adorning the homes of many people, "what ornaments I certainly commend, because these instruments delight the ear greatly, and greatly recreate the souls, which, as Plato said, remember the harmony arising from the motions of heavenly circles: more so, they please the eye, when they come from the hands of diligent and excellent masters.”<sup>4</sup> The importance of a \[musical\] instrument as an object not only to be played, but also to be looked at, gains strength in the following century, to the extent that the famous theorist <span id="person_tag">Giovanni Battista Doni</span> writes in his treatise on scenic music: “Therefore, in order to make the instruments appear to the gaze of the people, it is fitting to ensure that they have a beautiful and graceful appearance \[…\] because a gilded harp makes for a beautiful sight, and its sound is heard and better joins the human voice; and, in short, it has more greatness and nobility than keyboard instruments \[...\].”<sup>5</sup> And it is, perhaps, the fact the instruments are represented in paintings (and what paintings if we consider the one \[owned\] by Marazzoli!) that makes the importance of the aesthetics of these objects plainer yet. Lanfranco's painting depicts a woman enveloped up to her waist in ample, voluminous blue cloth. She is playing a double harp, its column carved and gilded, her face turned towards the viewer in the act of singing. To her right, in the background, two winged cupids join her in singing, reading from a sheet of music, while a large red brocade cloth on her left backgrounds the scene. The subject \[of the painting\] itself is interesting. What is it about?

Before <span id="person_tag">Franca Trinchieri Camiz</span> recognised it as mentioned in Marco Marazzoli's will,<sup>6</sup> the painting was considered as an allegory of music or simply “music.”<sup>7</sup> Marazzoli, the first owner of the painting, describes it as <span id="subjects_tag">“Venere che suona d’arpa e due Amori”</span>.<sup>8</sup> That this is <span id="subjects_tag">Venus</span> is demonstrated only by two cupids in the background, as the woman \[depicted\] has no attributes that would characterise her as Venus. The iconography of Venus as a musician is certainly unusual. Even as it is true that depictions of Venus connect her with music, for example, in <span id="person_tag">Titian</span>’s famous painting <span id="subjects_tag">_Venere e il suonatore di Organo_</span> (Fig. 3), Venus herself is rarely represented in the act of playing. Among other things, it is worth noting that Marazzoli's _Venus_ loses its connotation the moment it enters the Barberini collections, where it was inventoried from <span id="timeline_tag">1671</span> simply as a “large lifelike woman playing the harp semi-nude, by Cav. Lanfranco.”<sup>9</sup> The painting could be in relation to the representations of Venetian women (often courtesans), particularly in vogue in the <span id="timeline_tag">1500s</span>, depicted playing an instrument, usually a lute. They often assumed characteristics of Venus, goddess of love, by virtue of the erotic character of the image. Just like in the Venetian paintings, the woman is very 'true'; her hairstyle is fashioned in the way we find in other works from the early <span id="timeline_tag">1730s</span> (Fig. 4). The clogs, often worn by courtesans, and the earrings are elements contributing to the sensuous character of the figure. The same goes for musical activity, as music has been since antiquity considered capable of arousing strong emotions, especially if interpreted by a woman.<sup>10</sup>

Apart from the subject matter, it is also the theatricality of the composition that makes the painting stand out: the red cloth evoking a curtain, harp in the foreground, woman’s gaze turned to the viewer as if performing her music exclusively for him. Most conspicuous is the predominance of the instrument, which is very similar to the Barberini Harp.<sup>11</sup> The presence of the instrument in the painting is justified precisely because the painting belonged to the famous harpist Marco Marazzoli. Not only was he the owner of the painting, but the harp depicted in it was in his possession, even if it actually belonged to his patron Cardinal Antonio Barberini. The latter's inventory of <span id="timeline_tag">1636-44</span>, mentions, in fact, "a large gilded carved harp with its strings in Marco Marazzoli's hands”<sup>12</sup> one that reappears in the last will and inventory of the musician. Some documents in the <span id="subjects_tag">Barberini Archive</span> also attest that Antonio Barberini had commissioned a harp for the musician Marco Marazzoli in <span id="timeline_tag">1632-33</span>, and paid a total of around 125 _scudi_ for it.<sup>13</sup> Among these documents there is also a tool description provided by the carver that coincides with \[the carving work on\] the harp depicted by Lanfranco. One can imagine that this important and expensive instrument, made especially for the harpist, provided the inspiration for the painting, which probably would have been painted between <span id="timeline_tag">1633</span> – when the harp was made – and <span id="timeline_tag">1634</span> – when the painter Giovanni Lanfranco left Roma. This appears even clearer once we consider the leading role the harp assumes in the painting, the theatrical representation of it as almost bursting towards the viewer, turned to the side for a position that brings the carved column clearly into view.

**1) The painting inside Marazzoli’s home**

Marazzoli's relationship with the Barberini family began shortly after his arrival in Roma from <span id="map_tag">Parma</span>, his hometown, in <span id="timeline_tag">1626</span>, probably following Cardinal <span id="person_tag">Ippolito Aldobrandini</span>.<sup>14</sup> The earliest documents attesting to his service at the <span id="subjects_tag">Barberini court</span> date back to <span id="timeline_tag">1629</span> and concern the harp maintenance costs.<sup>15</sup> Indeed, he must have been known as a harpist, so much so that he was referred to in documents as "Marco dell’arpa." His rise within the Barberini circle and at the papal court is attested in his role of “bussolante”<sup>16</sup> conferred on him by the pope – <span id="person_tag">Urbano VIII Barberini</span> – in 1634. That same year he took part in the music performance at the <span id="subjects_tag">Giostra del Saracino</span> (Saracen Joust), a knightly tournament; Marazzoli can perhaps be identified as the harpist depicted on the ship of Bacchus (Fig. 5). In addition, Marazzoli had a number of roles in his service to Antonio Barberini, Urban VIII’s nephew. Marazzoli is documented in <span id="timeline_tag">1637</span> as “aiutante di camera,” a year later among the virtuosos of the family, and from <span id="timeline_tag">1639</span> as a "musician." The same year he became a part of the <span id="subjects_tag">Pontifical chapel</span> as a “cantore soprannumerario,” to become a full member in <span id="timeline_tag">1640</span>. And it was precisely at the end of the <span id="timeline_tag">1630s</span> that Marazzoli began composing music for theatrical operas OR WORKS? for the Barberini. This work was interrupted by the death of Urban VIII in <span id="timeline_tag">1644</span> and the consequent departure of his nephews for France, only to resume upon their return to Roma in <span id="timeline_tag">1653</span>, the year of the Barberini's reconciliation with <span id="person_tag">Pope Innocent X</span>.<sup>17</sup> Marazzoli’s bond with the Barberinis persisted throughout the life of this musician until his death in Roma in <span id="timeline_tag">1662</span>.

From reading the inventory drawn up on Marazzoli's death, we learn that he lived in via Felice, today's via Sistina, near the church of Santa Francesca Romana, which was demolished in the mid-twentieth century. In "a small room of the noble apartment with a hand missing in entering towards the courtyard" there was "a large, gilded harp without strings, in a case covered with red leather bearing the coat of arms of the Em. Sig. Card. Antonio.”<sup>18</sup> Presumably this is the harp depicted in the painting made for Marazzoli, and returned by him to the cardinal after his death.<sup>19</sup> This little room was intended for musical instruments, as in it we also find another ordinary harp (like the first, also belonging to Cardinal Antonio Barberini) and a Spanish guitar. The inventory also lists two other boxes containing various musical strings, a desk and a book "with various notes and accounts." Given the room’s scarce furnishings it was presumably where the instruments were kept. From there a corridor led to the “room of the first apartment.” Reading the inventory seems to suggest this to have been a reception room, richly furnished.<sup>20</sup> It is here that we find “a double, walnut coloured harpsichord with gold thread \[...\],” various mirrors, sculptural heads, two doors, one in blue and gold leather and the other \[covered\] in green cloth lined with “sangalla cloth,” and several paintings, almost all of profane subjects (with the exception of one depicting Magdalene and a drawing of the Assumption). Among these paintings we find two paintings by Lanfranco that Marco Marazzoli bequeathed to members of the Barberini family. Those are “l’Erminia tra i pastori”<sup>21</sup> destined for <span id="person_tag">Carlo Barberini</span>, and of “Cleopatra” which went to <span id="person_tag">Maffeo Barberini</span>, the Prince of Palestrina. However, the “Venere che suona d’Arpa” is not on display, which is curious considering that it must have been one of the most prestigious paintings in his collection, and that in this room it would have been in an ideal context among a harpsichord and a multitude of profane subjects. Considering the presence of the harpsichord and this room’s proximity to the little room housing musical instruments, it is conceivable that this was a room in which Marazzoli met with others to make music. Furthermore, the fact that the harp was Marazzoli's instrument would be another reason for exhibiting the painting in an important room of his home, where he could show off and appropriately represent himself as the musician.

Instead, the painting hangs in a room that is accessed after passing through two corridors and which is described as “contiguous with the room.”<sup>22</sup> This room is adorned with decorations of “red and yellow rasetti” with a door decorated with “broccatoni” in the same colours. The environment is given its character by a walnut wardrobe, an ebony study with ivory trim and six floral tapestry chairs. A mirror and various paintings of different subjects – sacred and profane – cover the walls, with pieces of silverware, a “Moor carved in wood with a gilded wooden shell on his head” and a large bronze crucifix completing the furnishings. Two paintings by Marco Marazzoli are to be found among the paintings hanging on the walls, which suggests that he, like other musicians linked to court environments, dabbled in painting.<sup>23</sup> These two paintings, "Icarus with a gilded frame" and "Dido \[...\] with a burnished and gilded frame" are the only paintings listed in the inventory as being made by Marazzoli. Lanfranco’s _Venus_ can be found displayed right next to Marazzoli’s _Didone_, following precisely the order of the inventory. And this is interesting, because it is as if Marazzoli had assembled in the same room works that refer to both his pictorial and musical activity, even though he was primarily a musician and not a painter. Apparently, he betrayed no discomfort in showing his paintings next to those by a very successful painter, such as Lanfranco. This points to the topic of “amateurism,” which developed within the court environments among both the nobles and the courtiers. A legacy of the past, this was a requirement of a “gentleman” to be at ease in various artistic (and other) disciplines, as described by <span id="person_tag">Baldassare Castiglione</span> in <span id="subjects_tag">_Cortegiano_</span>.<sup>24</sup> Without going deeper into the topic, this suggests that the arts were close to each other, and consequently how easily intertwined were the lives of artists and persons of various backgrounds.

The relationship between Marazzoli and Lanfranco can be traced back to the first period in which they were both in Roma, between 1626, the year of Marazzoli's arrival, and 1634, the year of Lanfranco's departure for <span id="map_tag">Napoli</span>. Both from <span id="map_tag">Parma</span>_,_ they also both found themselves in Roma, in the orbit gravitating around the Barberini. It is likely that the three paintings listed in Marazzoli's will (precisely _Venus_, _Cleopatra_ and _Erminia_) were also painted in that period. Nothing suggests that the relationship between Lanfranco and Marazzoli was that of a master and his student. We do know, however, <span id="person_tag">Giovanni Battista Passeri</span>’s <span id="subjects_tag"_>Vite de’ pittori</span>_, that Lanfranco's daughter "played the double harp very well and sang comfortably,”<sup>25</sup> suggesting a hypothesis that Marazzoli gave music lessons in Lanfranco's house. Perhaps it was that by hanging _Didone_, a painting by his own hand, next to Lanfranco’s painting, the subject of which and the presence of the harp suit Marazzoli more than any other, Marazzoli was also referring to the friendship that existed between them.

Let us turn back to the inventory one last time and note a detail that may escape us at first, but which, in our opinion, is not devoid of meaning. In the room described above there are, in addition to the paintings by Marazzoli and that of Lanfranco, two paintings of villages and some sacred subjects, including “Una Madonna di palmi quattro e tre larga con un Cristo, Un Angelo e S. Caterina con quattro Api alle Cantonate e cornice rabescata con cordoni dorati \[A Madonna four and three palms large with Christ, an Angel and St. Catherine with four Bees alle Cantonate and guilloche frame with gilded cords.\].”<sup>26</sup> The frame reveals the importance of the picture: it is rendered in a guilloche pattern and distinguished from the others by golden cords.<sup>27</sup> Most interesting, however, is the presence of the four bees, suggesting this was a gift from the Barberini family, perhaps as a reward for a service rendered.<sup>28</sup> We can deduce from this painting, just as with <span id="subjects_tag">_Venere che suona l’arpa_</span>,<sup>29</sup> something about the importance of Marazzoli's relationship with his patrons. In fact, returning to Lanfranco's painting, given the importance of the instrument, demonstrated by its carvings, dimensions, Cardinal Antonio’s coat of arms above the column, it is conceivable that anyone who knew Marazzoli would easily have seen references in the painting to the Barberinis, great patrons of music. It is significant that on Marazzoli's death this painting will be left to Cardinal Antonio Barberini: “Item I leave to Cardinal Antonio a large original painting by Cav.r Lanfranchi with its frame in black and gold. It is a Venere che sona d’Arpa e due Amori.”<sup>30</sup> Two other paintings by Lanfranco, already mentioned, were left to Carlo Barberini and Maffeo Barberini. More paintings were left to <span id="person_tag">Giulio Rospigliosi</span>, <span id="person_tag">Carlo Pio di Savoia</span>, and <span id="person_tag">Orazio Magalotti</span>. Here too it is clear that they belong to a well-defined circle of people who always refer to the Barberinis. Giulio Rospigliosi, future <span id="person_tag">Pope Clement IX</span>, wrote librettos for musical dramas presented by the Barberinis, while Orazio Magalotti was related to the pope's family through the marriage of his cousin, <span id="person_tag">Costanza Magalotti</span>, to Carlo Barberini, the Pope's brother.

In conclusion, Lanfranco's painting appears as a tribute to Marazzoli and his qualities as a musician through the representation of a very precious instrument, built specifically for him as one of the most distinguished harp virtuosos of his time. The painting obviously also pays homage to the Barberinis, as Marazzoli’s patrons, but also as patrons of important musical events in which, according to the words of Giovanni Battista Doni, the instruments were made to "appear to the people" and had to have a "beautiful and gracious presence," especially the harp that "has more than the great and the noble.”<sup>31</sup> The environment and furnishings in which the painting is exhibited in Marazzoli’s home is therefore also significant, a place clearly signalling a belonging to the court environment. In this room he presents himself and represents his microcosm: the music, of course, to which he owes his success, but, as we have seen, also painting, understood as the activity of a gentleman used to the court environment and the presence of princes and cardinals, in particular that of his patrons, the Barberinis.

***

***

***